AKS Application Routing Gateway API – Gateway, TLS and App1/App2 Setup

Purpose

This runbook captures the steps used to establish the AKS Application
Routing Gateway API (Istio-based), configure HTTP/HTTPS listeners,
integrate the Gateway with Azure Key Vault using Workload Identity, and
expose two test applications through HTTPRoutes.

Commands intentionally omit environment-specific parameter values.
Replace placeholders such as , , etc. when executing.

STEP 1 — Enable / verify AKS Application Routing with Istio Gateway API

Description: Enable the AKS Application Routing add-on with the managed
Istio Gateway API implementation, or verify that it is already enabled.
The important result is the GatewayClass “approuting-istio”.

Command: az aks show –resource-group –name –query
“addonProfiles.webApplicationRouting.enabled” -o tsv

Command: kubectl get gatewayclass

STEP 2 — Verify the Istio/Application Routing installation

Description: Verify that the AKS-managed Istio control plane is running
and that the Application Routing GatewayClass is available.

Command: kubectl get pods -n aks-istio-system

Command: kubectl get gatewayclass

STEP 3 — Create the Gateway namespace

Description: Create the dedicated Kubernetes namespace used by the
Gateway, its certificate ServiceAccount, SecretProviderClass and TLS
Secret.

Command: kubectl create namespace gateway-system

STEP 4 — Create the Gateway certificate managed identity

Description: Create a User Assigned Managed Identity dedicated to
Gateway certificate access. This identity will be federated with the
Kubernetes ServiceAccount used by the Gateway certificate integration.

Command: az identity create –resource-group –name

STEP 5 — Obtain the AKS OIDC issuer

Description: The AKS OIDC issuer is used by Workload Identity
federation. Obtain the issuer URL from the AKS cluster.

Command: az aks show –resource-group –name –query
“oidcIssuerProfile.issuerUrl” -o tsv

STEP 6 — Create the Gateway certificate ServiceAccount

Description: Create a ServiceAccount in gateway-system and associate it
with the Gateway certificate managed identity using the Azure Workload
Identity client-id annotation.

Command: kubectl apply -f

STEP 7 — Create the Federated Identity Credential

Description: Create a Federated Identity Credential on
gateway-cert-identity. It connects the AKS OIDC issuer and the
Kubernetes ServiceAccount subject
system:serviceaccount:gateway-system:gateway-cert-sa.

Command: az identity federated-credential create –name –identity-name
–resource-group –issuer –subject –audiences

STEP 8 — Grant Key Vault certificate access

Description: Grant gateway-cert-identity the Azure RBAC role “Key Vault
Secrets User” at the Key Vault scope. This allows the workload identity
to retrieve the certificate and private key material required for TLS.

Command: az role assignment create –assignee –role “Key Vault Secrets
User” –scope

STEP 9 — Create or import the Gateway certificate into Key Vault

Description: Create/import the certificate used by the Gateway HTTPS
listener. In the previous environment this was done manually from the
laptop rather than through the Bicep infrastructure pipeline.

Certificate: aks-gateway-internal Subject: CN=aks-gateway.internal

Command: az keyvault certificate import –vault-name –name –file

STEP 10 — Verify the certificate in Key Vault

Description: Verify that the certificate exists and is enabled before
configuring the Gateway HTTPS listener.

Command: az keyvault certificate show –vault-name –name

STEP 11 — Create the Gateway with HTTP and HTTPS listeners

Description: Create the Gateway named app-gateway using GatewayClass
approuting-istio. Configure both: - HTTP listener on port 80 - HTTPS
listener on port 443

The HTTPS listener uses TLS termination and references the Key Vault
certificate through the Application Routing Gateway API TLS integration.
The listener also specifies gateway-cert-sa.

Command: kubectl apply -f

STEP 12 — Configure the Gateway to use the Key Vault certificate

Description: The HTTPS listener contains the Application Routing TLS
integration options: - Key Vault certificate URI - certificate
ServiceAccount

The certificate URI should be the unversioned Key Vault certificate URI
so that certificate rotation can be supported.

Command: kubectl apply -f

STEP 13 — Verify the Gateway status

Description: Verify that the Gateway has been accepted and programmed
and that both listeners are present.

Command: kubectl get gateway -n gateway-system

Command: kubectl describe gateway app-gateway -n gateway-system

STEP 14 — Verify the automatically created SecretProviderClass

Description: Application Routing creates the SecretProviderClass for the
Gateway certificate integration. Verify that it exists in
gateway-system.

Expected resource: kv-gw-cert-app-gateway-https

Command: kubectl get secretproviderclass -n gateway-system

STEP 15 — Verify the Kubernetes TLS Secret

Description: The Application Routing certificate integration
synchronizes the Key Vault certificate into a Kubernetes TLS Secret used
by the HTTPS Gateway listener.

Expected resource: kv-gw-cert-app-gateway-https Type: kubernetes.io/tls

Command: kubectl get secrets -n gateway-system

Command: kubectl get secret -n gateway-system

STEP 16 — Verify the Gateway Service and Internal Load Balancer

Description: Verify that the Istio/Application Routing Gateway service
is exposed through an Azure Internal Load Balancer. The service should
be type LoadBalancer and use the internal-load-balancer annotation.

Command: kubectl get svc -n gateway-system

Command: kubectl describe svc -n gateway-system

STEP 17 — Create the application namespace

Description: Create a namespace for the test applications. Label the
namespace so that the Gateway is allowed to accept HTTPRoutes from it.

Command: kubectl create namespace demo-apps

Command: kubectl label namespace demo-apps gateway-access=allowed

STEP 18 — Deploy App1

Description: Deploy the first test application and expose it internally
with a Kubernetes ClusterIP Service named app1-service on port 80.

Resources: - Deployment: app1 - Service: app1-service

Command: kubectl apply -f

STEP 19 — Verify App1

Description: Verify that App1 pods are running and that the Service has
endpoints.

Command: kubectl get pods -n demo-apps

Command: kubectl get svc -n demo-apps

Command: kubectl get endpoints -n demo-apps

STEP 20 — Deploy App2

Description: Deploy the second test application and expose it internally
with a Kubernetes ClusterIP Service named app2-service on port 80.

Resources: - Deployment: app2 - Service: app2-service

Command: kubectl apply -f

STEP 21 — Verify App2

Description: Verify that App2 pods are running and that the Service has
endpoints.

Command: kubectl get pods -n demo-apps

Command: kubectl get svc -n demo-apps

Command: kubectl get endpoints -n demo-apps

STEP 22 — Create the App1 HTTPRoute

Description: Create an HTTPRoute in demo-apps and attach it to
gateway-system/app-gateway. Match requests with the /app1 path prefix
and forward them to app1-service on port 80.

The route can rewrite /app1 to / if the test application expects
requests at the root path.

Command: kubectl apply -f

STEP 23 — Create the App2 HTTPRoute

Description: Create an HTTPRoute in demo-apps and attach it to
gateway-system/app-gateway. Match requests with the /app2 path prefix
and forward them to app2-service on port 80.

The route can rewrite /app2 to / if the test application expects
requests at the root path.

Command: kubectl apply -f

STEP 24 — Verify HTTPRoutes

Description: Verify that both HTTPRoutes are accepted and attached to
the Gateway.

Command: kubectl get httproute -n demo-apps

Command: kubectl describe httproute app1-route -n demo-apps

Command: kubectl describe httproute app2-route -n demo-apps

STEP 25 — Test HTTP traffic

Description: Test the HTTP listener through the Gateway Internal Load
Balancer. Verify that /app1 reaches App1 and /app2 reaches App2.

Command: curl -v http:///app1

Command: curl -v http:///app2

STEP 26 — Configure local DNS/hosts entry for the test hostname

Description: For the proof of concept, the hostname aks-gateway.internal
was mapped to the Gateway Internal Load Balancer IP using /etc/hosts. In
a production environment, use the appropriate internal DNS solution
instead.

Command: sudo sh -c ‘echo “ ” >> /etc/hosts’

STEP 27 — Test HTTPS traffic

Description: Test the HTTPS listener using the hostname contained in the
certificate. For a self-signed certificate, use the CA certificate with
curl rather than disabling certificate validation.

Command: curl -vk https:///app1

Command: curl –cacert https:///app1

Command: curl –cacert https:///app2

FINAL RESOURCE INVENTORY

Azure: 1. AKS Application Routing add-on 2. AKS managed Istio Gateway
API implementation 3. User Assigned Managed Identity:
gateway-cert-identity 4. Federated Identity Credential 5. Key Vault 6.
Key Vault certificate: aks-gateway-internal 7. Key Vault RBAC
assignment: Key Vault Secrets User 8. Azure Internal Load Balancer
(created by the Kubernetes LoadBalancer Service)

Kubernetes: 1. Namespace: gateway-system 2. GatewayClass:
approuting-istio 3. ServiceAccount: gateway-cert-sa 4. Gateway:
app-gateway 5. SecretProviderClass: kv-gw-cert-app-gateway-https 6. TLS
Secret: kv-gw-cert-app-gateway-https 7. Namespace: demo-apps 8.
Namespace label: gateway-access=allowed 9. Deployment: app1 10. Service:
app1-service 11. Deployment: app2 12. Service: app2-service 13.
HTTPRoute: app1-route 14. HTTPRoute: app2-route

FINAL TRAFFIC FLOW

HTTP: Client -> Internal Load Balancer -> Istio Gateway HTTP listener
:80 -> HTTPRoute /app1 or /app2 -> Kubernetes Service -> Application Pod

HTTPS: Client -> Internal Load Balancer -> Istio Gateway HTTPS listener
:443 -> TLS termination using Key Vault certificate -> HTTPRoute /app1
or /app2 -> Kubernetes Service -> Application Pod

CERTIFICATE / IDENTITY FLOW

AKS OIDC issuer -> Federated Identity Credential ->
gateway-cert-identity -> Key Vault Secrets User -> Azure Key Vault
certificate -> Application Routing SecretProviderClass -> Kubernetes TLS
Secret -> Istio Gateway HTTPS listener :443
